<!DOCTYPE html>
<!-- Deliver as XHTML -->
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en-GB" xml:lang="en-GB">
<head>
<title>Worksheet 1: C Syntax and Versions</title>
<style>
h1, h2 { text-align:center; }
pre { margin-left:40px; }
</style>
</head>
<body>

<h1>Worksheet: C Syntax and Versions</h1>

<h2>Week 1<br />Mike Fraser</h2>

<p>Below is a simple C program, helloworld.c, which has several mistakes which
will prevent it from compiling. These are called 'syntax' errors, meaning that
the code does not conform to the required C language syntax. Copy the program
into a file and repair it so it compiles and runs. There are 7 problems with
the code. Try compiling with the <code>-Wall</code> flag, i.e. <code>gcc -Wall
helloworld.c -o helloworld</code>, to see what extra information you
receive.</p>

<pre>#include &lt;stdioo.h&gt;
#inclde &lt;stdlib.h&gt;

mian(void) {
  printf("Hello")
  printf(World);
  printf("\");
  return 0;
)
</pre>

<p>You may find the gcc compiler error guide at the following URL useful:</p>

<p style="margin-left:40px;">
<a href="https://www.cs.bris.ac.uk/Teaching/Resources/COMS10002/error.html"
>https://www.cs.bris.ac.uk/Teaching/Resources/COMS10002/error.html</a>
</p>

<p>There are different C versions, the original ANSI C standard, sometimes
called C89, then major revisions in 1999 (C99) and 2011 (C11). Read about this
history here:</p>

<p style="margin-left:40px;">
<a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C_(programming_language)#History"
>http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C_(programming_language)#History</a>
</p>

<p>Some features of the C language vary between these different specifications,
which means that not all C code is compatible with all C compilers or all other
C code. The gcc compiler allows you to pick the version of C you are compiling
using the <code>-std=</code> option, e.g. <code>gcc -std=c99 twelve.c -o
twelve</code>. Copy the following C code into a file and compile and run it
using the C99 standard.</p>

<pre>#include &lt;stdio.h&gt;

int main(void) {
// Calculate 3*4 and print the result
    printf("3*4=%d", 3*4);
    return 0;
}
</pre>

<p>The first line beginning // is a 'comment', which is a request for the
compiler to ignore the rest of the line. Re-compile the file with the C89
standard. What happens? Can you find an alternative way of writing a comment
which works properly for the C89 standard?</p>

<p>Finally, look at the printf statement. What is different about it compared
to the Hello World program. Change the values and see what happens. Can you
find ways of doing other calculations?</p>

</body>
</html>
